---
layout: post
title: Keychain Calipers
---

![Hero shot of calipers in hand](/images/2022-06-12/hero.jpg)

I've been doing a lot of projects in the physical, non-code world lately,
especially with 3D printing. It's gotten to the point where any time I encounter
a problem, my first thought is "How can I 3D print my way out of this?" As a
result, I'm constantly reaching for my trusty metal electronic calipers and
measuring things, then grabbing my iPad and sketching out some ideas.

This is all great fun, but it leaves me feeling naked and vulnerable when I'm
out of the house and I don't have my calipers. I never got into the purse
habit, and you can't just pop a set of full size calipers in your pocket. I mean
I guess you could. It sounds uncomfortable.

I particularly feel this need at the hardware store. Items are often
customer-shelved, the labels are often badly scratched, and it's sometimes
faster to just take a quick measurement than to try to find and read the
official number.

So the thought struck me recently that a small set of calipers on a keychain
would be super useful. I went on Amazon, and found a bunch of listings for cheap
little metal calipers. Unfortunately, I ordered some, and immediately found that
they're basically toys. They're off by over a millimeter, which makes them
pretty useless, since they only measure a range of 0-30 millimeters in the first
place. And once I had them in my hand, it was clear that a keychain that _looks_
like a tiny scale model of a set of calipers is silly. All of the keychains I
found were like this: more of a cheap novelty than something intended to be
useful.

I also realized that a functional calipers keychain doesn't need to be _that_
small. People regularly carry around things like access cards on their
keychains, and those are reasonably comfortable to keep in your front pocket.

So I designed and made my own. But I found that there were some interesting
constraints to making a useful set of calipers this compact. If you just want to
make your own, you can skip to the "[Assembly](#assembly)" section below, which
includes CAD files. You'll probably want to at least read the next section
though.

# Usage

Before I get into how I designed this and how they work, let's look at how you
actually read them.

These calipers have a range of about 49 millimeters, and are read in two steps.
First, you read the tens off the main scale. You're looking at whichever section
is _fully_ revealed, so if you see most of the twenty, you're still at 10.

Next, look at the slider, and see which marking best lines up with a marking on
the rail. If that marking is on the side with the digits, then your ones digit
is that number. For example, this is what 24 mm looks like:

![Keychain calipers showing 24 mm](/images/2022-06-12/calipers-24.jpg)

If the best aligned marking is on the left side, then add 0.5mm to the digit
across from it. So this is what 36.5 mm looks like:

![Keychain calipers showing 36.5 mm](/images/2022-06-12/calipers-36-5.jpg)

If the best aligned marking is a little bit off, you'll probably find that there
are two markings that kind of match. The measurement will be somewhere in
between those. I'll tend to vaguely guess at around quarter millimeter
increments in these cases, but don't expect to get too much precision. These are
plastic, 3D printed calipers, so they're a little flexible, and they're not
designed to ultra-tight tolerances.

# Design

So why did I design them this way, rather than just putting millimeter markings
on the body? Well, for one thing, it's hard to emboss very fine marks like that
with filament printing. I also find reading old-school calipers at millimeter
precision pretty slow and annoying. You really have to get in there to see which
marking you've hit. I also didn't want to try to build a retainer into these to
lock in a measurement, which means you really need to be able to read them in
place, which makes it even more awkward to look closely at the main scale.

Of course, electronic calipers solve this by just giving you a nice big display
of numbers. I almost never bother with the retaining screw on electronic
calipers, because I can see the measurement immediately. I wanted to find a way
to get that kind of magnified display on my keychain calipers.

Here's the thing: traditional calipers already have a system for magnifying a
measurement. It's called a "vernier".

## Verniers

A vernier is a visual aid included on many mechanical instruments to exploit the
human visual system to make it easier to take precise measurements. It takes
advantage of a quirk of vision, where markings that line up tend to jump out at
us.

Let's look at how verniers work. Most of the explanations I've found online
just give some examples, and don't really go into why they work.

Typically, a vernier is used on a set of calipers to allow submillimeter
precision, but let's look at what a traditional vernier that deals in
millimeters would look like.

![A vernier scale showing 0 mm](/images/2022-06-12/vernier-0.png)

A vernier uses two scales, the main scale, and the vernier scale. These scales
have their markings placed at different intervals. In our 1 mm vernier, the main
scale has its markings at 10 mm, while the vernier scale has its markings at 9 mm.

We can see now, that if we shift the vernier right up by 4 mm, like soâ€¦

![A vernier scale showing 4 mm](/images/2022-06-12/vernier-4.png)

the "4" marking on the vernier scale lines up with one of the markings on the
main scale.

The reason is because of remainders. Each marking on the vernier scale "loses" a
millimeter compared to the main scale, so for the v-th Vernier marking to line
up with any marking on the main scale, it must be moved right by v millimeters
(mod 10).

### OK, but your vernier doesn't look anything like that

Yeah, so the problem with using a traditional 1-mm scale vernier is that it
would have to be 9 cm long. And the size of the slider is wasted range. If both
the slider and the body are 9 cm, you can't measure anything at all, and then
the jaws also take up space. So to make my calipers useful, they'd need to be
about 15 cm long, which is not convenient to fit in your pocket.

But the vernier is all about modular arithmetic. We don't care _which_ marking
on the main scale our vernier marking lines up with. We just care that we hit
_a_ marking when measuring the corresponding distance.

So what if we chop up our vernier scale into three pieces like this?

![A vernier scale chopped into pieces](/images/2022-06-12/vernier-chopped.png)

Now we can move these pieces wherever we want, and as long as we stick to a
multiple of 10 mm, the vernier will still work. So we shift them over to all fit
within the same 3 cm range, like so:

![A vernier scale chopped into pieces ang aligned](/images/2022-06-12/vernier-aligned.png)

You might notice that if you read the numbers from left to right, they're in the
same order as they appear on my vernier. I've taken these three vernier scale
segments, and overlaid them to fit within a smaller range.

I'm guessing I'm not the first to invent this kind of "chopped up" vernier
scale, but I couldn't find any prior art for it. I'd bet that a description of
something very similar to this is sitting in some forgotten 80-year-old book on
nomography in a library somewhere.

What's nice about this approach is that it lets you tune the size of your slider
to trade off readability against space, which is exactly the sort of control you
need if you're trying to build a usable set of calipers you can keep in your
pocket.

### And what about the 0.5 markings?

There's nothing particularly special going on with the half-markings. They're
just shifted by 0.5 mm. It's just a separate vernier scale with an offset. The
reason I've included them is that the vernier effect works best when there's a
really unambiguous alignment, and the half-markings make that happen more often.

## Enough about the verniers, what is going on with that faceplate design?

I went through several iterations on the slider. My initial design had it as a
single print with supports, but it's very difficult to get it to both fit
snuggly, and run smoothly along the body that way. It's also horrible to try to
get support material out of that part.

The slot-and-rail design is set up to keep the vernier system as flat as
possible. The more inset those markings are, the more you have to look head-on
to get a good reading, which is inconvenient.

If you can print soluble supports, you might want to redesign the slider to
print as a single piece, since inserting the faceplate during the slider print
is the most likely step to fail.

# Assembly

OK, enough talk about how and why they're designed like this. Let's talk about
how to make your own.

You'll need the CAD files, which you can get [here](/downloads/keychain-calipers.zip).

I've included SHAPR and STEP files if you want to make modifications, and the
3MF file if you just want to print as is.

This is a fairly hands-on print. If your printer has multi-material support, it
will be a bit easier, but there's still a step where you'll need to manually
intervene.

There are three parts to this print, which you should print in this order:

1. Face plate
2. Slider
3. Body

For all of these prints, I recommend a 0.4 mm nozzle (although 0.2 mm should be
fine if you have the patience), variable layer heights maxing at 0.15 mm, and an
extrusion width for perimiters and top solid infill no greater than 0.25 mm.
That fine extrusion width will give you better resolution on the digits, and a
much nicer finish on your top surfaces, which will make the calipers slide more
easily.

You'll need two filaments with good color contrast. I'm going to refer to these
as "orange" and "black" to match my own print, but you can swap these out, so
long as you're consistent.

# Printing the face plate

The face plate is a pretty straightforward print, which requires no intervention
other than filament changes. There will be two color changes here, which will
look like this:

![Color swaps for the face plate](/images/2022-06-12/plate-colors.png)

Start this print with black, then switch to orange, then switch back to black.

# Printing the slider

You _must_ print the face plate before the slider, because you're going to
insert the face plate mid-print.

This has a single filament and a pause, like so:

![Color swaps for the slider](/images/2022-06-12/slider-colors.png)

I've truncated the preview for this print right after the pause, so you can see
where it happens. This is what the print will look like right before the pause:

![Slider print before pause](/images/2022-06-12/slider-before.png)

During this pause, you're going to press the face plate into place, number side up, so
that those pegs go through the holes in the plate. This does not have to be
_perfectly_ flush, but you need to get it as close as possible, and to have the
plate sitting as close to horizontal as you can. Err on the side of having the
plate hang low, rather than poking up.

(If your slicer/printer doesn't support pausing, you can do a filament change
here, and just put the same filament back in.)

For this print, start with black, then switch to orange.

# Printing the body

The body is also a pretty simple print, with two color swaps:

![Color swaps for the body](/images/2022-06-12/body-colors.png)

Start with orange, switch to black, and then switch back to orange.

## Final assembly

At this point, you should be able to simply slide the slider onto the body. The
slider is retained by putting a keyring through the hole at the end of the body.

Now go grab a pair of proper calipers, and check that you're getting the right
values.
